*make_*

|GNU_make|
|MKS_make|
|make_problems|

While make is commonly used in UNIX environments, it's a flawed tool.  A
good white paper on some of the problems with GNU make is
https://www.conifersystems.com/whitepapers/gnu-make/ (see the end of
this document for its text).

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
*GNU_make*

Useful options:
    -n          Dry run
    -B          Everything is out of date
    -f mf       Use mf as the makefile
    -k          Keep going to do as much as possible

    --> Use 'gcc -MM *.c' to generate dependencies for a makefile

Exit status
    0           make was successful
    1           Used -q flag and some target is not up to date
    2           Encountered an error

Macros
    a = b       Recursively expanded macro definition
    a := b      Simply expanded definition (expanded when defined)
    $(var:a=b)  Replace a at end of every word with b
    $@          File name of target rule or archive file.
    $%          foo.a(bar.o):  $% = bar.o, $@ = foo.a
    $<          Name of first dependency
    $?          Name of all dependencies newer than target
    $^          All dependencies with spaces between them

Recipes
    %.html: %.rst
        Thus, a.html will get made from a.rst.
Targets
    a : b       Common target/dependency form
    a :: b      How to have multiple rules for the same target
    .PHONY: x   x's recipe should always be run

Variables
    a = b       Define a to be b.  b can contain other variable references;
                they are expanded recursively.
    a := b      Define a to be b, but expand all variable references when
                the definition is encountered.
    a += x      Append x to the definition of a.

Conditionals
    ifeq (cond_a,cond_b)
        ...
    else
        ...
    endif

    Other forms of ifeq:
        ifeq 'arg1' 'arg2'
        ifeq "arg1" 'arg2'
        ifeq 'arg1' "arg2"

    ifeq can also be ifneq

    Test for empty variable:
        ifeq ($(strip $(foo)),)
            text-if-empty
        endif

    ifdef var ... else ... endif

    ifndef var ... else ... endif

Options
  Used a lot:
    -B          Make all targets
    -n          Show what will be done
    -f fl       Use fl as the makefile
    -k          Keep going and do as much as possible


    -C dir      Change to directory dir before reading the makefile
    -d          Print debugging information
    -e          Give variables taken from the environment precedence
                over variables from makefiles.
    -f file     Use file as a makefile.
    -h          Show help
    -i          Ignore all errors in commands executed to remake files.
    -I dir      Directory to search for included makefiles
    -j jobs     Number of jobs to run simultaneously
    -k          Continue as much as possible after an error.  While
                the target that failed, and those that depend on it,
                cannot be remade, the other dependencies of these
                targets can be processed all the same.
    -l
    -l load     No new jobs should be started if there are others
                jobs running and the load average is at least load
                (a floating-point number).  With no argument, removes
                a previous load limit.
    -n          Print the commands that would be executed, but do not
                execute them.
    -o file     Do not remake file (assume it's very old)
    -p          Print the data base (rules and variable values) that
                results from reading the makefiles; then execute as
                usual.
    -q          Don't run commands; just return 0 if up to date,
                nonzero otherwise.
    -r          Don't use built-in implicit rules
    -s          Do not print the commands as they are executed
    -S          Cancel the effect of the -k option
    -t          Touch files instead of running their commands.
    -v          Print the version of make
    -w          Print a message containing the working directory
                before and after other processing.  This may be use-
                ful for tracking down errors from complicated nests
                of recursive make commands.
    -W file     Pretend that the target file has just been modified.
                When used with the -n flag, this shows you what would
                happen if you were to modify that file.  Without -n,
                it is almost the same as running a touch command on
                the given file before running make, except that the
                modification time is changed only in the imagination
                of make.

Functions

    $(patsubst pattern, replacement, text)
        Finds whitespace-separated words in text that match pattern and
        replaces them with replacement.  Pattern may contain % which 
        matches any character.  If replacement contains %, it is replaced
        with the text that matched % in pattern.

    $(strip string)
        Remove leading and trailing whitespace.

    $(dir names...)
        Extract the directory part of names...

    $(notdir names ...)
        Extracts all but the directory part of names...

    $(suffix names ...)
        Extracts the suffixes of each file name.
        
    $(basename names ...)
        Extracts all but the suffix.

    $(addsuffix suffix, names...)
        e.g.:  $(addsuffix .exe, $(files))

    $(addprefix prefix, names...)

    $(join list1, list2)
        $(join a b, .c .o) results in a.c b.o

    $(word n, text)
        Returns nth word of text.  $(word 2, foo bar baz) returns bar.

    $(words text)
        Returns number of words in text.  Thus, the last word of text
        is $(word $(words, text), text).

    $(firstword names...)
        Same as $(word 1, names).
    
    $(wildcard pattern)
        Space separated list of file names globbed from pattern.

    $(foreach var,list,text)
        Let var take on each value in list, then substitute into 
        text.  Example: $(foreach dir, c:/tmp, $(wildcard $(dir)/*)) 
        will expand to each file in c:/tmp.

    $(origin variable)
        Shows where a variable originated.  Values are:
            undefined     Never defined
            default       Has a default definition
            environment   Defined in environment and -e wasn't used
            environment override  Defined in environment, but -e was used
            file          Defined in a makefile.
            command line  Defined on the command line
            override      Defined with an override directive
            automatic     Automatic variable

    $(shell cmd)
        Same as backquotes in sh.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
*MKS_make*

     make, makeq -- maintain program-generated and interdependent files

SYNOPSIS
     make [-EeiMnpqrstuVvx] [-k|-S] [-c dir] [-f file] ...
     [macro definition ...]  [-D macro definition ...]  [target ...]

DESCRIPTION
     make is a  command that helps  you manage projects  that contain a
     set of interdependent files.   Typical  examples would  be  a
     program  with  many source and object  files, or a  document that
     is  built from source files, macro files,  and  so on.  make
     keeps all the  files up-to-date with  one another: if one file
     changes, make updates all the other files that depend on the
     changed file.

     Note: This implementation  of make features  the .POSIX special
     target to provide maximum portability.  When you specify this
     target, make processes the makefile as  specified in the  POSIX.2
     standard.  For details, see the description of .POSIX in the
     Special Target Directives section of this man page.

     Note: makeq is  available on DOS;  it is small  and more limited,
     but much faster than make.

Options
     make accepts the following options:

     -c dir
          attempt to change into the specified directory upon startup.
          If make can't change directory, it displays an error message.
          This is useful for recursive makefiles when building in a
          different directory.

     -D macro definition
          define macro on  the command line  before reading any
          makefile.  Use the same form  as a normal  macro definition
          (macro=string).   If you use this option,  make assigns the
          value to the macro before reading the makefile;  any
          definition of  the  same macro  contained in  the makefile
          will  supercede  this definition.  Note  that make uses  any
          macros defined in  this way before  it reads any  makefile,
          including the startup file.   This allows you  to define a
          startup file by pro- viding a value for MAKESTARTUP on the
          command line:

             make -D MAKESTARTUP=$HOME/project/startup.mk

     -E   suppress reading of the environment completely.

     -e   read the environment  after reading the makefile.  If you don't spec-
          ify -E or -e, make reads the environment before reading the makefile,
          except for the  SHELL environment variable, which you must explicitly
          import.  This option does not affect the value of MAKEFLAGS.

     -f file
          use file as the makefile, ignoring the makefiles specified as prereq-
          uisites to  the .MAKEFILES  special target.  If  you specify file  as
          dash (-), make reads from standard input.

     -i   ignore all errors and continue making other targets.  This is equiva-
          lent to the .IGNORE attribute or macro.

     -k   make all independent targets, even if an error occurs. If you specify
          -k, make ignores  the error and continue to make as much as possible.
          make does not  attempt to update  anything that depends on the target
          that was being made when the error occurred.

     -M   do not copy macro definitions from the command line and the MAKEFLAGS
          environment variable to the MAKEFLAGS macro.

     -n   display the  commands that  make would execute  to update the  chosen
          targets, but  do not  actually execute any  recipe lines unless  they
          have a plus sign (+) command prefix.  make displays recipe lines with
          an at sign (@) command prefix on the standard output.

          With group recipes,  make displays the  commands it uses  to update a
          give target, but it also executes the commands.

          If make finds  the string $(MAKE)  in a recipe  line, it expands  it,
          adds -n to  the MAKEFLAGS, and  then executes the  recipe line.  This
          allows you to  see what recursive  calls to make do.  The output cor-
          rectly shows  line breaks  in recipes that  are divided into  several
          lines of text using the \<newline> sequence.

     -p   display the  digested  makefile, including  macro and target  defini-
          tions, in a  human readable form  useful for debugging.   make itself
          cannot read this output as an input file.

     -q   check whether the  target is up-to-date.  If it is, make exits with a
          status of 0; otherwise, it exits with a status of 1 (typically inter-
          preted as  an error  by other software).   make doesn't run  commands
          associated with  the target unless  they start with  a plus sign  (+)
          command prefix.

     -r   do not read the default rules from the startup file.

     -S   terminate if an error occurs when bringing a target up-to-date (oppo-
          site of -k). This is the default.

     -s   do not display  recipe commands, warning  messages, or touch messages
          (see the -t  option).  This is equivalent to the .SILENT attribute or
          macro.

     -t   touch the targets  to mark them  as up-to-date, but only execute com-
          mands to change  a target if  the target has  a plus sign (+) command
          prefix.  make does  not touch up-to-date targets or targets that have
          prerequisites but do  not have recipes.   make displays a message for

          each touched target file indicating the file name.

     -u   force an unconditional  update: make behaves  as if all the prerequi-
          sites of the given target are out-of-date.

     -V   display the version number of make and a list of built-in rules.

     -v   display a detailed  account of make's progress, including files read,
          definition and redefinition  of each macro, meta-rule and suffix rule
          searches, and other information.

     -x   export all macro definitions to the environment.  This happens before
          make begins making targets (but after it reads the entire makefile).

Targets
     A target is normally a file that you want to ensure is up-to-date with
     the files on which it is dependent.  For example, you may want to check
     to see if a is  based on the most recent version of the corresponding
     source code and if not,  recompile the source  code to get  an
     up-to-date version.  In this case, the  compiled program file  is the
     target and the corresponding source code files  are prerequisites (that
     is, the files on which a target is dependent).

     make updates all  targets that are  specified on the command line.  If
     you do not specify  any target, make  updates the targets in the first
     rule of the makefile.  A target is out-of-date if it is older than any
     of its pre- requisites (based  on  modification times)  or if it  does
     not exist.   To update a target, make first recursively ensures that
     all the target's pre- requisites are  up-to-date,  processing them  in
     the  order in which  they appear in the  rule.  If the  target itself
     is out-of-date, make then exe- cutes the recipe associated with the
     target.  If the target has no associ- ated recipe, make considers it
     up-to-date.

     make also  supports  another form  of targets,  known as special
     targets, described in the following Special Targets section.

Makefiles
     A makefile is a text file which describes the dependencies between
     various files.  A makefile  normally contains a list of targets and
     identifies the prerequisites  on  which  each  depends.  It  also
     contains a  series  of instructions, called recipes  which describe the
     actions to be taken if a given target is out-of-date with its
     prerequisites.

     By default, if  you do not specify the -f option, make looks for a file
     in your current directory  named makefile.  If  make does not find this
     file, and if your  file system supports  mixed-case file names, it
     searches your current directory for  a file named  Makefile.  If make
     finds either file, it uses this file as your makefile.

     You can change  the default makefiles  with the .MAKEFILES special
     target.  This target is  already specified in the startup.mk file.  See
     the follow- ing Special Targets section for more information.

Macro Definitions
     Macro definitions may take several forms.

        macro = string

     is the  usual form.  If  string contains macro  references, make does
     not expand them  when  the macro  is  defined, but  when  the macro is
     itself expanded.

        macro := string

     expands macros inside string before assigning the value to macro.

        macro += string

     appends string to the previous value of macro.

     You can use  any amount of  white space on  both sides of macro operators.
     make defines the  name macro to have the value string and replaces it with
     that  value  whenever  it  is  used as  $(macro)  or ${macro}  within  the
     makefile.  It  is  possible to  specify  a $(macro_name) or  ${macro_name}
     macro expansion  where  macro_name contains  more  $(...) or ${...}  macro
     expansions itself.

     Normally, make does  not include white  space at the  beginning and end of
     string in the  definition of macro;  however, it never  strips white space
     from macros imported from the environment.

     If you want  to include white space in a macro definition specified on the
     make command line, you must enclose the definition in quotes (" "").

     make defines macro in the following order:

       1. Macro definitions in the built-in rules.

       2. Macro definitions on the command line associated with the -D option.

       3. Macro definitions in startup files.

       4. Contents of the environment.

       5. Macro definitions in the makefiles (in the order they appear).

       6. Macro definitions on the command line without the -D option.

     Note: If you  specify the -e option, make reads the makefiles before read-
     ing the contents  of the environment.   If you specify the -E option, make
     does not read the contents of the environment.

     If a macro  is already defined  when make encounters  a new definition for
     it, the new definition replaces the old one.  For example, a macro defini-
     tion for name  on the command  line overrides a definition for name in the
     makefile.  You can use the -v option to display macro assignments, as make

     performs them.

Macro Modifiers
     MKS Make supports macro expansions of the form:

        $(macro_name:modifier_list:modifier_list:...)

     Possible modifiers are:

     ^"string"      prefix tokens
     +"string"      suffix tokens
     b              file portion of all path names, without suffix
     d              directory portion of all path names
     f              file portion of all path names, including suffix
     l              all characters mapped to lowercase
     s/pat/string/  simple pattern substitution;  any character can  be used to
                    separate the pattern from the substitution text
     suffix=string  suffix replacement
     t"separator"   tokenization with given separator.
     u              all characters mapped to uppercase

     You may specify macro modifiers in either upper or lowercase.

     For example, the following macro assignment

        test = D1/D2/d3/a.out f.out d1/k.out

     produces the following expansions:

     $(test:d)      -> D1/D2/d3 . d1
     $(test:b)      -> a f k
     $(test:f)      -> a.out f.out k.out
     ${test:DB}          -> D1/D2/d3/a f d1/k
     ${test:s/out/in/}   -> D1/D2/d3/a.in f.in d1/k.in
     $(test:f:t"+") -> a.out+f.out+k.out
     $(test:t"+")        -> D1/D2/d3/a.out+f.out+d1/k.out
     $(test:u)      -> D1/D2/D3/A.OUT F.OUT D1/K.OUT
     $(test:l)      -> d1/d2/d3/a.out f.out d1/k.out
     $(test:^"/rd/")     -> /rd/D1/D2/d3/a.out /rd/f.out /rd/d1/k.out
     $(test:+".Z")  -> D1/D2/d3/a.out.Z f.out.Z d1/k.out.Z

Run-time Macros
     Run-time macros can take on different values for each target.

     $@   When building a  normal target, this macro evaluates to the full name
          of the target. When building a library, it expands to the name of the
          archive library. For example, if the target is

             mylib(member)

          $@ expands to

             mylib.

     $%   When building a  normal target, this macro evaluates to the full name
          of the target. When building a library, it expands to the name of the
          archive member. For example, if the target is

             mylib(member)

          $% expands to

             member

     $>   The name of the library if the current target is a library member.

     $*   The target name  with no suffix ($(%:db)) or the value of the stem in
          a meta-rule.

     $&   The list of all prerequisites, in all rules that apply to the target.
          In :: rules, this macro produces a value identical to the $^ macro.

     $?   The list of  all prerequisites which  are newer than  the target.  In
          rules using  the  :: rule  operator, this macro  expands to the  same
          value as $^.

     $^   The list of  all prerequisites taken  from the list  specified on the
          rule line of the recipe where the $^ symbol appears.

     $<   In normal  rules, this  contains the list  of all prerequisites.   In
          inference rules,  this contains the  single prerequisite that  caused
          the inference to  succeed.  In rules using the :! rule operator, this
          macro expands to the current out-of-date prerequisite.

     You can modify the run-time macros with the letters B, D and F to indicate
     only the directory  portion of the  target name (the  current directory is
     represented by a  dot (.)), or  only the file  portion of the target name.
     For example,  define.h  is the only  out-of-date prerequisite, the  macros
     $(?B), $(?D) and  $(?F) expand to define, dot (.) and to define.h, respec-
     tively.

     The constructs $$@, $$%, $$>, and $$* yield meaningful results when placed
     in a prerequisite list as a dynamic prerequisite.

     $$@ stands for the target currently being made. The following two examples
     are equivalent:

        fred : $$@.c
        fred : fred.c

     The construct may be modified:

        fred.obj : $$(@:b).c

     If you are building a library, $$% stands for the name of the archive mem-
     ber being made.   If you are  building a normal target, $$% stands for the
     name of the target currently being made.

     $$* stands for the name of the current target being made, but with no suf-
     fix.

     If you  are building  a library, $$>  stands for the  name of the  archive
     library being made.   If you are  not building a library, its use is inva-
     lid.

Comments
     Comments begin  with  the number  sign  (#) character  and  extend to  the
     end-of-line.  make discards all comment text.

Makefile Contents
     Inside makefiles, you can split long lines over several lines of text.  To
     do this, put  a backslash (\)  at the very  end of the  line.  You can use
     this technique to  extend comments as well as recipe lines and macro defi-
     nitions for example.

     If a rule  or macro definition  must contain a # character, use \#; other-
     wise, make  mistakes the  # for the  beginning of a  comment.  Also, if  a
     macro definition must contain a single $ character, use $$.

     File names that  contain a colon  (:) must always be enclosed in quotes ("
     "):

        "a:target" : "a:prereq"

Rules
     The general format of a rule is

        targets [attributes] ruleop [prerequisites] [;recipe]
        {<tab> recipe}

     The parts of the rule are described as follows.

     targets
          one or more target names.

     attributes
          a list, possibly  empty, of attributes  to apply to  the list of tar-
          gets.

     ruleop
          an operator token,  usually :, that  separates the target  names from
          the prerequisite  names  and may  also affect  the processing of  the
          specified targets.

     prerequisites
          a list of zero or more names on which the specified targets depend.

     recipe
          command to execute  to update targets. It may follow on the same line
          as the  prerequisites, separated  from them by  a semicolon (;).   If
          such a recipe  is present, make  takes it as the first in the list of
          recipe lines defining how to make the named targets.  Additional rec-
          ipe lines  may follow the  first line of  the rule.  Each  subsequent
          recipe line must begin with a tab character.

     The possible rule operators are described here:

     targets : prereqs
          simple rule definition. For explicit targets, at most one simple rule
          may have  a  recipe, in  contrast  with the  :: rule operator,  whose
          description follows.

     targets :! prereqs
          executes  the  recipe  for  the  associated  targets  once  for  each
          out-of-date prerequisite.  In  simple rules,  the recipe is  executed
          only once, for  all out-of-date prerequisites  at the same time.  The
          $< macro expands  to the current  prerequisite if it appears in rules
          with this rule operator.

     targets :^ prereqs
          inserts the  specified prerequisites  before any other  prerequisites
          already associated with the specified targets.

     targets :- prereqs
          clears the previous  list of prerequisites before adding the new pre-
          requisites.

     targets :: prereqs
          is used for  multiple rules applying  to the same  target.  Each rule
          can specify a  different set of prerequisites with a different recipe
          for updating  the  target.  Each rule  is treated independently;  the
          target is remade  for each rule with out-of-date prerequisites, using
          the corresponding recipe.

     targets :| prereqs
          can only be  used in meta-rules.  It tells make  to treat each  meta-
          dependency as an independent meta-rule. For example:

             %$O :| archive/%.c rcs/%.c /srcarc/RCS/%.c
                  recipe...

          is equivalent to

             %$O : archive/%.c
                  recipe...
             %$O : rcs/%.c
                  recipe...
             %$O : /srcarc/rcs/%.c
                  recipe...

          This operator  is  particularly useful for  searching for MKS  Source
          Integrity archives.   If  the RCSPATH  variable  used by  MKS  Source
          Integrity is defined as

             archive/%f;rcs/%f;/srcarc/rcs/%f

          then the meta-rule

             % :| $(RCSPATH:s/%f/%/:s/;/ /)
                  co -l $<

          searches the path looking for an RCS file and checks it out.

Circular Dependencies

     There are  two  types of circular  dependencies: within-rule and  between-
     rule.  A within-rule  circular dependency occurs when the target's name is
     in included in the list of prerequisites for that target.  For example,

        c.o : a.o b.o c.o

     is a within-rule circular dependency.  make detects a within-rule circular
     dependency when it is parsing the makefile to build the dependency tree.

     A between-rule circular  dependency occurs when you have two targets, each
     of which includes the other's name in its prerequisite list.  For example,

        a.o : b:o
        b:o : a.o

     is a between-rules  circular dependency.  make detects a between-rule cir-
     cular dependency when  it is processing  the dependency tree  built during
     the parse phase.

     Normally make only  detects circular dependencies  for those targets actu-
     ally being built.   When a circular dependency is encountered, make issues

     a warning message,  removes the offending  prerequisite from the list, and
     continues parsing  the  makefile.  The .CYCLECHECK  special target can  be
     used to alter make's treatment of circular dependencies.  For details, see
     the Special Targets section of this man page.

Recipes
     You can  use a  target that has  prerequisites but no  recipes to add  the
     given prerequisites to that target's list of prerequisites.

     You may preface  any recipe line with a command prefix immediately follow-
     ing the TAB character (-, @, + or all three).  - indicates that make is to
     ignore non-zero exit  values when it  executes this recipe  line.  @ indi-
     cates that make  is not to  display the recipe line before executing it. +
     tells make to  always execute this line, even when -n, -q, or -t is speci-
     fied.

     Group recipes  begin  with [ in  the first non-white  space position of  a
     line, and  end with  ] in the  first non-white space  position of a  line.
     Recipe lines in a group recipe need not have a leading tab.  make executes
     a group recipe  by feeding it as a single unit to a shell.  If you immedi-
     ately follow the  [ at the beginning of a group recipe with one of -, @ or
     +, they  apply  to the  entire group in  the same way  that they apply  to
     single recipe lines.

Inference Rules
     With inference  rules, you  can specify general  rules for building  files
     rather than creating a specific rule for each target.

     MKS Make  provides two forms  of inference rules:  suffix rules and  meta-
     rules.  MKS Make  includes suffix rules to ensure compatibility with older
     makefiles.  Meta-rules,  however,  provide a  more  general mechanism  for
     specifying make's default  behavior.  They provide a superset of the func-
     tionality of suffix rules.  make searches all meta-rules before using suf-
     fix rules.

     make uses the  inference rules to  infer how it  can bring a  target up to
     date.  A list of inference rules defines the commands to be executed.  The
     default startup.mk contains  a set of  inference rules for the most common
     targets.  You can specify additional rules in the makefile.

     When make finds  no explicit target rule to update a target, it checks the
     inference rules.   If  make finds  an  applicable inference  rule with  an
     out-of-date prerequisite, it  executes that rule's  recipe.  (See also the
     section describing the .DEFAULT special target).

Meta-rules
     Meta-rules have one target with a single percent symbol % which matches an
     arbitrary string called  the stem. The  % in a  dependency stands for  the
     stem.

     The inference rule to update a target matching pattern p1%s1, where p1 and
     s1 are  prefix  and suffix  strings of the  target, having a  prerequisite
     p2%s2, where % is the stem from the target, is specified as follows:

        p1%s1 : p2%s2 ; recipe...

     Either the prefix or suffix string may be empty.

Transitive Closure
     Meta-rules provide a  mechanism which allows  several meta-rules to  chain
     together to eventually  infer all the  needed prerequisites to  create the
     target.

     This is called  transitive closure. For example, suppose you have the fol-
     lowing two meta-rules

        %$O : %.c
             ... rule body...
        %.c : %.y
             ... rule body ...

     When you specify

        make file.obj

     make uses the  first meta-rule to  look for file.c.   If it can't  find an
     explicit rule to build file.c, it again looks through the meta-rules for a
     rule to build %.c, which it finds in

        %.c : %.y

     Thus, make can rebuild file.obj from file.y.

     make considers each meta-rule only once when performing transitive closure
     to avoid a situation where it loops forever.  For example, if you have the
     rule

        % : %.c
             ... rule body ...

     the command

        make file

     causes make to look for file.c.  If the meta-rules were not restricted and
     file.c  did  not  exist,  then  make would  look  for file.c.c,  and  then
     file.c.c.c, and so  on.  Because make  uses each meta-rule only once, this
     can't happen.

     make computes transitive  closure once for  each meta-rule head  the first
     time the pattern  matches a target.   When transitive closure is computed,
     make adds all  the computed rules to the rule set for that meta-rule head.
     For example, if you have the rules

        %$E : %$O
             recipe 1...
        %$O : %c
             recipe 2...

     and you are  making file.exe, this target matches successfully against %$E
     causing make to  compute transitive closure  for %$E.  As a result of this
     computation, a new rule is created:

          %$E : %.c
               recipe 2...
               recipe 1...
               .REMOVE target recipe for %$O, if not .PRECIOUS

     make executes this  rule if file$O.obj  doesn't exist.  When make finishes
     the computation for  the rule head,  it marks the  rule head as transitive
     closure computed.  Since  make adds all possible new rules to the rule set
     the first time the computation is done, it is not necessary to do it again
     -- nothing new is added.

     The best way  to understand how  this works is  to experiment with  little
     make files with  the -v option  specified. This shows  you in detail  what
     rules are being  searched, when transitive  closure is calculated and what
     rules are added.

Order of Rule Generation
     Since transitive closure  allows make to  generate new rules, it is impor-
     tant to understand the order in which this is done:

      1. make searches for explicit rules in the order in which they appear, so
         explicit rules always take precedence.

      2. make  reads  meta-rules in  the  order in  which  they appear  in  the
         makefile.  The  first rule that  appears in the  makefile will be  the
         first one checked.

      3. New explicit  meta-rules  (as distinct  from  meta-rules generated  by
         transitive  closure)  replace  old  ones.   In  other words,  if  your
         makefile contains an  explicit rule like this one, it will replace the
         default rule in startup.mk:

            %$O : %.c
                    rule1

         If you use  the -v option,  make prints a  warning when it  replaces a
         meta-rule.

      4. When transitive  closure is calculated,  the new meta-rules  generated
         are added to  the end of  the list of possible meta-rules.  Thus, make
         always finds the  explicit rules first,  so they take  precedence over
         generated rules.  You  can use the  -v option to  see what rules  make
         generates and the order in which they appear.

      5. make performs  two  passes through  the rules.  On  the first pass  it
         attempts to find  a match with  an explicit rule  in the makefile;  if
         this does not  succeed, make performs  a second pass  to find a  match
         with an existing file.

Suffix Rules
     make treats targets  that begin with  a period and  contain no slashes  or
     percent signs as suffix rules.  If there is only one period in the target,
     it  is a  single-suffix  inference rule.   Targets  with two  periods  are
     double-suffix inference rules.  Suffix rules do not have prerequisites but
     do have commands associated with them.

     When make finds  no explicit rule to update a target, it checks the suffix
     of that target  (.s1) against the suffix rules.  make examines a prerequi-
     site based on  the base name  of the target  with the second  suffix (.s2)
     appended, and if  the target is out-of-date with respect to this prerequi-
     site, make executes the recipe for that inference rule.

     If the target  to be built  does not contain a suffix and there is no rule
     for the target, make checks the single suffix inference rules.  The single
     suffix inference rules  define how to  build a target if make finds a rule
     with one  of  the single suffixes  appended.  A rule  with one suffix  .s2
     defines how to build target from target.s2.

     Any suffixes used  in a suffix  rule must appear  as a prerequisite of the
     special target  .SUFFIXES.   The order  that  the suffixes  appear in  the
     .SUFFIXES rule determines the order in which make checks the suffix rules.
     New suffixes and suffix rules are added to the existing list.  To turn off
     the suffix rules, place

        .SUFFIXES:

     in your makefile.  This clears the  prerequisites of the  .SUFFIXES target
     which prevents the enaction of any suffix rules.

     The search algorithm  used for suffix  rules depends on whether or not the
     .POSIX special target is specified.  When .POSIX is specified, the follow-
     ing steps describe the search algorithm for suffix rules:

      1. Extract the suffix  from the target.  If that target has no suffix, go
         to step 6.

      2. Is it in the .SUFFIXES list?  If not, then quit the search.

      3. If it is  in the .SUFFIXES  list, look for  a double suffix  rule that
         matches the target suffix.

      4. If you find  one, then extract  the base name  of the file, add on the
         second suffix and  see if the  resulting file exists.   If it doesn't,
         then keep searching  the double suffix  rules.  If it does exist, then
         use the recipe for this rule.

      5. If no successful match is made, then the inference has failed.

      6. If the  target  did not have  a suffix, then  check the single  suffix
         rules in the  order that the  suffixes are specified  in the .SUFFIXES
         target.

      7. For each single suffix rule, add the suffix to the target name and see
         if the resulting file name exists.

      8. If the file  exists, then execute the recipe associated with that suf-
         fix rule.  If  the file doesn't exist, continue trying the rest of the
         single suffix rules.

      9. If no successful match is made, then the inference has failed.

     When the .POSIX special target is not specified, make handles suffix rules
     in the same  manner as traditional implementations of make.  The following
     steps describe the search algorithm for suffix rules in this situation.

      1. Extract the suffix  from the target.  If that target has no suffix, go
         to step 8.

      2. Is it in the .SUFFIXES list?  If not, then quit the search.

      3. If it is  in the .SUFFIXES  list, look for  a double suffix  rule that
         matches the target suffix.

      4. If you find  one, then extract  the base name  of the file, add on the
         second suffix and see if the resulting file exists.  If it does, go to
         step 7.  If not, continue with step 5.

      5. Is there an  inference rule for  the resulting file?   If yes, execute
         the recipe  associated with  that rule (which  should describe how  to
         make the file exist) and go to step 7.

      6. Search for the  next double suffix rule that matches the target suffix
         and return to  step 4.  If  the double suffix rules are exhausted then
         the inference has failed.

      7. Use the recipe for the target rule.

      8. If the  target  did not have  a suffix, then  check the single  suffix
         rules in the  order that the  suffixes are specified  in the .SUFFIXES
         target.

      9. For each single suffix rule, add the suffix to the target name and see
         if the resulting file name exists.

     10. If the file  exists, then execute the recipe associated with that suf-
         fix rule.  If  the file doesn't exist, continue trying the rest of the
         single suffix rules.

     11. If no successful match is made, then the inference has failed.

     MKS Make also  provides a special feature in the suffix rule mechanism for
     archive library handling,  useful mainly for  compatibility with System  V
     Make.  If you specify a suffix rule of the form

        .suf.a:
                  recipe

     the rule matches  any target specified  as a library member, regardless of
     what the  actual library  suffix is.  For  example, suppose your  makefile
     contains the following rules:

        .SUFFIXES: .a .c
             echo adding $< to library $@

     If mem$O exists, then the following command

        make "mylib(mem.obj)"

     causes make to print this message:

        adding mem.obj to library mylib

     Refer to Making  Libraries in the  User's Guide for more information about
     libraries.

Attributes
     make defines several  target attributes.  Attributes  may be assigned to a
     single target,  a  group of targets,  or to all  targets in the  makefile.
     Attributes affect what  make does when  it needs to  update a target.  You
     can associate attributes  with targets by specifying a rule of the follow-
     ing form:

        attribute_list : target ...

     This assigns the  attributes in attribute_list  to the given  targets.  If
     you do not  specify any targets,  the attributes apply  to every target in
     the makefile.  You can also put attributes inside a normal rule, as in:

        targets attribute_list : prerequisite ...

     These are the recognized attributes:

     .EPILOG
          Insert shell  epilog  code when executing  a group recipe  associated
          with any target having this attribute set.

     .IGNORE
          Ignore an error  when trying to  make any target  with this attribute
          set.

     .LIBRARY
          Target is a library.

     .PRECIOUS
          Do not remove this target under any circumstances.  Any automatically
          inferred prerequisite inherits this attribute.

     .PROLOG
          Insert shell  prolog  code when executing  a group recipe  associated
          with any target having this attribute set.

     .SETDIR
          Change current working  directory to specified  directory when making
          associated targets.   The syntax of  this attribute is  .SETDIR=path,
          where path is  the path name  of desired working  directory.  If path
          contains any colon  (:) characters, the  entire attribute string must
          be quoted, not just the path name.

     .SILENT
          Do not echo  the recipe lines when making any target with this attri-
          bute set, and do not issue any warnings.

     You can use any attribute with any target, including special targets.

Special Target Directives
     Special Target Directives  are called targets  because they appear  in the
     target position of  rules; however, they are really keywords, not targets.
     The rules in  which they appear  are directives which control the behavior
     of make.

     The special target  must be the only target in a special rule--you cannot
     list other normal or special targets.

     Some special targets  are affected by some attributes.  Any special target
     can be given  any attribute, but  often the combination is meaningless and
     the attribute has no effect.

     .BRACEEXPAND
          This target may  have no prerequisites  and no recipe associated with
          it.  If set,  the target enables the outdated brace expansion feature
          used in older  versions of MKS  Make.  (This target is ignored if the
          .POSIX special  target  is set.)   Older versions  of make use  brace
          expansion to expand a token list of this form:

             string1{token_list}string2

          make adds string1 to the front, and string2 to the end, of each token
          in the token_list.   To include brace  brackets while this  target is
          set, use {{  and }}; you cannot include literal brace brackets in the
          token list.  You can achieve the same kind of brace expansion in mod-
          ern versions of  make by using macro expansion with prefix and suffix
          modifiers:

             $(TOKEN_BASE:^"prefix":+"suffix")

          Note that  the double  quotes are required.   Future versions of  MKS
          Make will dispense with brace expansion completely.

     .CYCLECHECK
          This special target  may have no  prerequisites and no recipe associ-
          ated with it.   If set, it determines how make treats circular depen-
          dencies (for more  information, see the Circular Dependencies section
          of this man  page).  You can specify one of five attributes with this
          target.  If  you specify  more than one  attribute, an error  message
          results.  The five attributes are:

          .SILENT
               make remains silent  about any within-rule and between-rule cir-
               cular dependencies,  removes the  offending dependency from  the
               list of prerequisites, and continues.

          .WARNTARG
               make issues warnings  for named targets  with circular dependen-
               cies.  If the  name of the  dependency is the  same as the named
               target, it is  removed from the  list of prerequisites  and make
               continues.  This is  the default behavior  if .CYCLECHECK is not
               specified or is specified with no attributes.

          .WARNALL
               make issues warnings  for all within-rule  circular dependencies
               regardless of whether  the target is  being built or not and for
               all between-rule  circular dependencies  for the named  targets.
               The offending dependency  is removed from  the list of prerequi-
               sites and make continues.

          .FATALTARG
               make treats all circular dependencies for named targets as fatal
               errors.  It issues an error message and exits.

          .FATALALL
               make  treats  all  within-rule  circular dependencies  as  fatal
               errors whether the target is being built or not.  It also treats
               all  between-rule circular  dependencies  for named  targets  as
               fatal errors.  make issues an error message and exits.

     For example, to  set the circular  dependency check to make's default, use
     the rule:

        .CYCLECHECK .WARNTARG:

     .DEFAULT
          This target has no prerequisites, but it does have a recipe.  If make
          can apply no  other rule to produce a target, it uses this rule if it
          has been defined.

     .ERROR
          make executes  the  recipe associated  with  this target whenever  it
          detects an error condition.

     .EXPORT
          All prerequisites  associated  with this  target which correspond  to
          macro names  are  exported to  the  environment at  the point in  the
          makefile at which this target appears.  If you don't specify any pre-
          requisites for this target, all macros will be exported.

     .GROUPEPILOG
          make adds the recipe associated with this target after any group rec-
          ipe for a target that has the .EPILOG attribute.

     .GROUPPROLOG
          make adds  the recipe  associated with this  target before any  group
          recipe for a target that has the .PROLOG attribute.

     .IMPORT
          make searches in the environment for prerequisite names specified for
          this target and  defines them as  macros with their  value taken from
          the environment.   If  the prerequisite  .EVERYTHING  is given,  make
          reads in the entire environment (also, see the -e and -E options).

     .INCLUDE
          make reads one or more additional makefiles (specified in the prereq-
          uisite list), as  if their contents  had been inserted at this point.
          If the prerequisite list contains more than one file, make reads them
          in order from left to right.

          make uses the following rules to search for extra makefiles:

            * If a relative file name is enclosed in quotes, or is not enclosed
              with angle brackets  (< and >),  make looks in the current direc-
              tory.  If the  file isn't present, make then looks for it in each
              directory specified by the .INCLUDEDIRS special target.

            * If a  relative name is  enclosed with angle  brackets (< and  >),
              make only searches  in the directories  specified by the  .INCLU-
              DEDIRS special target.

            * If an absolute  path name is given, make looks for that file, and
              ignores the list associated with the .INCLUDEDIRS special target.

     .INCLUDEDIRS
          The list of  prerequisites specified for  this target defines the set
          of directories to search when including a makefile.

     .MAKEFILES
          The list of  prerequisites is the  set of files to try to read as the
          user makefile.  These  files are made in the order they are specified
          (from left to  right) until one  is found to  be up to date.  This is
          the file that is used.

     .NOAUTODEPEND
          Disable the  autodependency  feature when  building libraries.   When
          this special  target is  used, only library  members which have  been
          explicitly given as dependents are considered prerequisites.

     .POSIX
          Process the  makefile  as specified  in  the POSIX.2 draft  standard.
          This special target  must appear before the first non-comment line in
          the makefile, and  may have no  prerequisite list, or recipe, associ-
          ated with it.  The target does the following:

          * causes make to  use the shell when executing all recipe lines; make
           invokes one shell per line, regardless of the setting of SHELLMETAS.
          * disables  brace  expansion  (the  .BRACEEXPAND  special  target  is
           ignored).
          * disables meta-rule inferencing.
          * disables conditionals.
          * disables dynamic prerequisites generation for libraries.
          * disables group recipes.
          * disables library autodependency.
          * make does not  check for the  string $(MAKE) when  run with the  -n
           options specified.
          * make always prints a message if no work is done.
          * When attempting to do suffix rule inference, the inference succeeds
           only if the the inference prerequisite file exists.

     .REMOVE
          make uses the  recipe of this target to remove any intermediate files
          that it creates  if an error is encountered before creating the final
          target.  This .REMOVE  target will only  delete a file that satisfies
          all of the following criteria:

          * the file didn't exist when make began running
          * the file is named as an intermediate target, produced by invoking a
           meta-rule which was produced by transitive closure
          * the file is not explicitly named in the makefile
          * the generated target doesn't have the .PRECIOUS attribute
          * the file is a prerequisite of a rule that is actually used

     .SOURCE
          The prerequisite list  of this target defines a set of directories to
          check when trying to locate a target file name.

     .SOURCE.x
          Same as .SOURCE,  except that make  searches the .SOURCE.x list first
          when trying to  locate a file matching a target with a name that ends
          in the suffix .x.

     .SUFFIXES
          make appends the  prerequisite list of this target to the set of suf-
          fixes used when  trying to infer  a prerequisite for  making a target
          using suffix rules.  If you specify no prerequisites, make clears the

          list of suffixes,  effectively disabling suffix rules from that point
          on.

Control Macros
     make defines a  number of control  macros that, like special target direc-
     tives and attributes,  alter its behavior.   A control macro  that has the
     same function as a special target or attribute also has the same name.

     Macros which are  said to be  defined internally are automatically created
     by make  and  you can  use  them with  the  usual $(name) construct.   For
     example, you can use $(PWD) to obtain the current directory name.

     Recognized control macros are:

     DIRSEPSTR
          Contains the characters used to separate parts in a path name and can
          be set by  the user.  make uses the first character in this string to
          build path names when necessary.

     .EPILOG
          If assigned  a  non-empty value,  the .EPILOG  attribute is given  to
          every target.

     GROUPFLAGS
          Specifies options to  pass to GROUPSHELL when make invokes it to exe-
          cute a group recipe.

     GROUPSHELL
          Gives the  path  name of  the command  interpreter (shell) that  make
          calls to process group recipes.

     GROUPSUFFIX
          Specifies a string  for make to  use as a  suffix when creating group
          recipe files to  be handed to  the command interpreter.  This must be
          .bat if you  are using the DOS command.com, and .cmd if you are using
          the OS/2 or NT cmd.exe.

     .IGNORE
          If this is assigned a non-null value, make assigns the .IGNORE attri-
          bute to every target.

     INCDEPTH
          The current depth of makefile inclusion.  This is set internally.

     MAKE This is set  by the startup file and may be changed by the user.  The
          standard startup file defines it as

             $(MAKECMD) $(MFLAGS)

          The MAKE macro  is not used by make itself, but the string $(MAKE) is
          recognized when using the -n option for single line recipes.

     MAKECMD
          The name with which make was invoked.

     MAKEDIR
          Full path name  of the initial  directory in which  make began execu-
          tion.

     MAKEFLAGS
          The MAKEFLAGS macro  contains all the options and macros specified in
          the MAKEFLAGS environment  variable plus all  the options and  macros
          specified on the command line, with the following exceptions:

            * The options -c,  -D, -f, and  -p are silently ignored if they are
              found in the MAKEFLAGS environment variable.

            * Any of options  -c, -D, -f,  -p, -v, or -V, when specified on the
              command line, are not added to the MAKEFLAGS macro.

            * When the -M  option is specified, macro definitions from the com-
              mand line  and  from the MAKEFLAGS  environment variable are  not
              added to the MAKEFLAGS macro.

          Options in the  MAKEFLAGS environment variable may have leading minus
          signs and can  be separated by  spaces.  These are  stripped out when
          the MAKEFLAGS macro is constructed.

          Note: make  always  reads the  MAKEFLAGS environment variable  before
          reading the makefile.  The -E and -e options do not affect this.

     MAKESTARTUP
          Has the default  value $ROOTDIR/etc/startup.mk on  DOS, OS/2 and  NT.
          (On UNIX and POSIX systems, the $ROOTDIR is omitted.)  To change this
          value, you can  set the MAKESTARTUP  environment variable before run-
          ning make.  You  can also specify  a value for  this control macro on
          the command line, if you use the -D option:

             make -DMAKESTARTUP=$HOME/project/startup.mk

     MFLAGS
          Same as MAKEFLAGS, except that it includes the leading switch charac-
          ter.

     NULL Permanently defined to be the empty string.

     OS   Name of the  operating system for  which this version of make is com-
          piled.

             DOS     on DOS
             OS2     on OS/2
             NT      on NT
             unix    on UNIX systems
             POSIX   on POSIX systems

     .PRECIOUS
          If this  is assigned  a non-empty value,  make assigns the  .PRECIOUS
          attribute to every target.

     .PROLOG
          If this  is  assigned a  non-empty  value, make  assigns the  .PROLOG
          attribute to every target.

     PWD  Full path name of the current directory in which make is executing.

     SHELL
          Specifies the  full path  name of the  command interpreter that  make
          calls to process  single line recipes  if they contain one or more of
          the characters  given in SHELLMETAS.  Otherwise, make executes  these
          commands directly.  By  default, the value  of the SHELL  environment
          variable does not  affect the value  of this macro;  however, you can
          use the .IMPORT  special target to  assign the environment variable's
          value to this  macro.  You can  also use the EXPORT special target to
          assign this macro's value to the SHELL environment variable.

     SHELLFLAGS
          Specifies options to  pass to the shell when invoking it to execute a
          single line recipe.

     SHELLMETAS
          Specifies a list  of metacharacters that  can appear in single recipe
          lines.  If make  finds any metacharacter, it invokes the recipe using
          the shell specified by SHELL; otherwise, it executes the recipe with-
          out the shell.

     .SILENT
          If this  is  assigned a  non-empty  value, make  assigns the  .SILENT
          attribute to every target.

     SWITCHAR
          The character currently being used to mark options in command lines.

Making Libraries
     A library is  a file containing  a collection of  object files.  To make a
     library, you specify  it as a  target with the .LIBRARY attribute and list
     its prerequisites.  The  prerequisites should be  the object members  that
     are to go  into the library.  When make makes the library target, it looks
     for the  prerequisites  in the  library if it  cannot find an  appropriate
     object file.

     When make finds  lib(member), it declares the lib portion as a target with
     the .LIBRARY attribute  and automatically declares the member portion as a
     prerequisite of the lib target.  When make finds lib((entry)), it declares
     the lib portion  as a target with the .LIBRARY attribute and automatically
     declares the module defining entry as lib's associated prerequisite.

     This autodependency can be turned off by the .NOAUTODEPEND special target.
     Since autodependency is  not POSIX compatible,  it is also disabled by the
     .POSIX special target.

Conditionals
     Conditional expressions use the following form:

        .IF expression
        ... if text ...
        {.ELSIF expression2
        ... elsif text ...}
        [.ELSE
        ... else text ...]
        .END

     You can nest  the conditionals (that is, the text may contain another con-
     ditional).  The .IF,  .ELSE, .ELSIF, and .END must start in the first col-
     umn of the line.  expression or expression 2 can have one of three forms:

        string

     is true if the given string is non-empty,

        string == string

     is true if the two strings are equal, and

        string != string

     is true if the two strings are not equal.

     Typically, one or  both strings contain  macros, which make expands before
     making comparisons.  make  also discards white  space at the start and end
     of the text  portion before the comparison.  This means that a macro which
     expands to nothing  but white space  is considered an empty  value for the
     purpose of the  comparison.  If a macro expression needs to be compared to
     an empty string,  compare it to  the value of the macro NULL for readabil-
     ity.

     The text enclosed  in the conditional  construct must have the same format
     that it would  have outside the  conditional.  In particular, make assumes
     that anything that  starts with a  tab inside the  conditional is a recipe
     line.  This means  that you cannot use tabs to indent text inside the con-
     ditional (except,  of  course, for  recipe lines  which always begin  with
     tabs).

ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
     make uses the following environment variables:

     MAKEFLAGS
          contains a  series  of make  options  which are  used as the  default
          options for any  make command.  You  may specify the  options with or
          without leading minus signs (-) and blanks between them.  It may also

          include macro definitions  of the form  usually found on  the command
          line.

     MAKESTARTUP
          contains the path  name of the  make startup file.   By default, make
          uses the file  $ROOTDIR/etc/startup.mk as its startup file.  To use a
          different file, set this environment variable before running make.

     SHELL
          contains the name  of a command interpreter.  To assign this value to
          the control  macro SHELL,  use the .IMPORT  special target.  You  can
          also use the  .EXPORT special target to assign the value of the SHELL
          macro to this environment variable for commands run from recipes.

     make automatically  imports  all other  environment variables, unless  you
     specify the -E option.

FILES
     make uses the following file:

     $ROOTDIR/etc/startup.mk
          default startup file containing default rules.

DIAGNOSTICS
     If a command  in a recipe  line fails (exits with a non-zero status), Make
     returns the exit  status of the  failed command.  Since  most commands use
     exit statuses between 0 and 10, Make uses exit status values below 10 only
     for failures which do not run recipe lines.

     Possible exit status values for Make are:

     0  Successful completion.

     1  Returned if you specified -q and file is not up to date.

     2  Failure due to any of the following:
          -- unknown command line option
          -- missing argument to option, such as no file name for -f

     126
        Recipe command not executable.

     127
        Recipe command not found.

     129-254
        Make was interrupted  by a signal;  the error code is the signal number
        OR'ed with 128.  For example, SIGINT  (CTRL-C) is frequently  signal 1:
        the return code from Make is 128|1, or 129.

     255
        Failure because of any of the following:
          -- Macro cannot be redefined

          -- Macro variables must be assigned with :=
          -- Special target cannot be a prerequisite
          -- Too many makefiles specified
          -- Configuration file not found
          -- No makefile present
          -- Missing .END for .IF
          -- No target
          -- Unable to return to directory
          -- Too many open files
          -- Open failed
          -- File not found
          -- Unable to change directory
          -- No more memory
          -- Line too long
          -- Detected circular macro definition
          -- Unterminated pattern string
          -- Unterminated replacement string
          -- Token separator string must be quoted
          -- Unterminated separator string
          -- Expansion too long
          -- Suffix too long
          -- Unmatched quote
          -- .IF .ELSE nesting too deep
          -- .ELSE without .IF
          -- Unmatched .END
          -- Inference rules result in circular dependency
          -- No macro name specified
          -- Write error on temp file
          -- Target not found, and can't be made
          -- Don't know how to make <target>
          -- <+ diversion unterminated
          -- <+ diversion cannot be nested
          -- <+ missing before +>
          -- Incomplete recipe group
          -- Mixed single and group recipe lines
          -- Unmatched ]
          -- Expecting macro or rule definition, found neither
          -- Name too long
          -- Unable to determine current directory
          -- Only one NAME attribute allowed in rule line
          -- Multiple targets are not allowed in % rules
          -- Special target must appear alone
          -- Duplicate entry in target list
          -- Syntax error in % rule, missing % target
          -- Duplicate entry in prerequisite list
          -- Missing targets or attributes in rule
          -- Multiply defined recipe for target
          -- Empty recipe for special target
          -- Imported macro NAME not found in environment
          -- No .INCLUDE file(s) specified
          -- Include file NAME, not found
          -- NAME ignored on special target
          -- Attributes possibly ignored

          -- Cannot find member defining symbol ((NAME))
          -- Invalid library format
          -- Can't touch library member
          -- SHELL macro not defined
          -- Too many arguments
          -- Could not export NAME
          -- Cannot open file
          -- Detected circular dependency
          -- Unable to stat /
          -- Unable to stat .
          -- Cannot open ..
          -- Read error in ..
          -- Metarule too long: "rule"

PORTABILITY
     POSIX.2.  x/OPEN Portability  Guide 4.0.  All  UNIX systems.  DOS  3.1 and
     up.  OS/2 2.0 and up.  Windows 95. NT 3.51 - 4.0.

     The following features of MKS Make are enhancements to POSIX.2:

      * The following options; -c dir, -D macro_def'n, -E, -M, -u, -V, -v, -x.
      * The -n option  has enhanced functionality  not covered by the standard;
       for more  information  see the  explanations  of the  -n option and  the
       .POSIX special target in this man page.
      * The run-time macros: $&, $^, $>.
      * The dynamic prerequisites: $$%, $$>, $$*, $$@.
      * All macro expansion modifiers except for suffix replacement.
      * Macro assignments of the following forms:

               macroname := stringassigned
               macroname += stringassigned

      * Brace expansion.
      * Backslash continuation.
      * The quoting mechanism, as in the following example:

               "a:target" : "a:prerequisite"

      * All rule operators except the colon (:).
      * Conditionals.
      * Meta-Rules.
      * All MKS Make attributes except .IGNORE, .PRECIOUS, .SILENT.
      * All MKS Make special targets except .DEFAULT, .POSIX, .SUFFIXES.
      * All MKS  Make control macros  except SHELL (referred  to in POSIX.2  as
       control macros).
      * The search algorithm for suffix rule follows the POSIX.2 rules when the
       .POSIX special target  is specified, but behaves like traditional imple-
       mentations when it is not specified.

LIMITS
     On DOS, no single makefile script line can be longer than 8192 characters;
     on OS/2, NT, Windows 95, and UNIX and POSIX systems, no script line can be
     longer than 16834 characters.

     In some environments, the length of an argument string is restricted.  For
     example, DOS command line arguments cannot be longer than 128 bytes if you
     are using the standard command.com command interpreter.

     Also, on DOS  the script line  is further limited  to 2048 characters when
     using makeq.exe.

NOTES
     When the .SETDIR  special target is  used, MKS Make checks the file attri-
     butes of targets and prerequisites on every pass through a rule.  This can
     significantly increase the number of file system accesses.

     MKS provides two  versions of MKS Make on DOS: a conventional version, and
     a quick version.   Use the conventional  version of MKS  Make when you are
     processing large makefiles.  Use the quick version when you are processing
     small makefiles, and are concerned with speed.

     make.exe  Conventional version of make
     makeq.exe Quick version of make

SEE ALSO
     makefile(5)

     Oram, A. &  Talbott, S. Managing  Projects with Make, 2ed.  Sebastopol CA:
     O'Reilly & Associates, Inc.: 1991

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Problems with make                                  *make_problems*

https://www.conifersystems.com/whitepapers/gnu-make/

Whats Wrong With GNU make?

    GNU make is a widely used tool for automating software builds. It is
    the de facto standard build tool on Unix. It is less popular among
    Windows developers, but even there it has spawned imitators such as
    Microsofts nmake.

    Despite its popularity, make is a deeply flawed tool. Its
    reliability is suspect; its performance is poor, especially for
    large projects; and its makefile language is arcane and lacks basic
    language features that we take for granted in other programming
    languages.

    Admittedly, make is not the only automated build tool. Many other
    tools have been built to address makes limitations. Some of these
    tools are clearly better than make, but makes popularity endures.
    The goal of this document is, very simply, to educate you about some
    of the issues with maketo increase awareness of these problems.

    Most of the points in this article apply to the original Unix make
    as well as GNU make.  Most people using make today are probably
    using GNU make, though, so, where differences exist, when we refer
    to make and makefiles here we are speaking of GNU make.

    This document assumes that the reader is already familiar at a basic
    level with make and understands concepts such as rules, targets, and
    dependencies.

Language Design

    Anyone who has written a makefile has probably learned the hard way
    about one feature of its syntax: its use of tabs. Any line
    specifying a shell command for a rule must begin with a tab. Spaces
    will not doit must be a tab.

    Unfortunately, this is just one of the many strange aspects of the
    make language.

Recursive Make

    Recursive make is a common makefile coding pattern where a rule
    invokes another session of make. Since each session of make only
    reads in one top-level makefile, this is a natural way to build a
    makefile for a project consisting of several submodules.

    Recursive make causes so many problems that a classic article
    Recursive Make Considered Harmful was written describing whats
    wrong with it. The article makes many valid points, some of which
    are discussed later in this document, but its genuinely difficult
    to write makefiles that do not use recursive make.

The Parser

    Most programming language parsers follow a similar pattern. First,
    the input is tokenized or scanned, discarding comments and
    whitespace and converting freeform text into a stream of tokens,
    such as symbols, identifiers, and reserved words. The resulting
    token stream is parsed using a grammar that specifies what
    combinations and orderings of tokens are legal. Finally, the
    resulting parse tree is interpreted, compiled, etc.

    makes parser does not follow this standard model. You cant parse a
    makefile without also executing it. Variable substitution can happen
    almost anywhere, and if you dont know the value of a variable, you
    cant continue parsing. It is challenging to write other tools that
    can parse makefiles, because you must reimplement the whole
    language.

    Theres no clear separation of tokens in make. Take the handling of
    commas. Sometimes a comma is part of a string and has no special
    meaning:

    X = y,z

    Sometimes a comma separates the strings being compared in an if
    statement:

    ifeq ($(X),$(Y))

    Sometimes a comma separates arguments to a function:

    $(filter %.c,$(SRC_FILES))

    But sometimes, even within arguments to a function, a comma is just
    part of a string:

    $(filter %.c,a.c b.c c.cpp d,e.c)

    (since filter only takes two arguments, that last comma doesnt
    introduce a new argument; its just another character in the second
    argument)

    Whitespace follows a similarly obscure set of rules. Sometimes
    whitespace matters; sometimes it doesnt. Strings are not quoted, so
    its not visually clear which whitespaces matter. Since there is no
    list data type, only strings, whitespace must be used to separate
    elements in lists. This leads to a lot of complexity if a filename
    ever includes a space.

    The following example illustrates the confusing treatment of
    whitespace. An obscure trick is required to create a variable whose
    value ends with a space. (Normally trailing whitespace is swallowed
    by the parser, but this happens before, not after variable
    substitution.)

    NOTHING :=
    SPACE := $(NOTHING) $(NOTHING)
    CC_TARGET_PREFIX := -o$(SPACE)
    # now I can write rules like $(CC_TARGET_PREFIX)$@

    Weve only scratched the surface with commas and whitespace. Few people
    understand all the intricacies of the make parser.

Uninitialized Variables and Environment Variables

    If a makefile accesses an undefined variable, make does not generate
    an error. Instead, it obtains the variables initial value from the
    identically named environment variable in the calling shell. If the
    environment variable doesnt exist, the variable starts as an empty
    string.

    This leads to two types of problems. First, typos are not caught and
    flagged as errors. (You can pass make an argument to flag these as
    warnings, but this isnt the default, and sometimes an uninitialized
    variable is used intentionally.) Second, environment variables may
    unexpectedly interfere with your makefile code. You cant predict
    what environment variables the user might set, so to be safe you
    must carefully initialize every variable before you reference it or
    append to it using +=.

    There is also a confusing distinction between the results of make
    FOO=1 vs. the results of export FOO=1 followed by make. In the
    former, a line in the makefile FOO = 0 will have no effect! Instead,
    you must write override FOO = 0.

Conditional Syntax

    One major weakness of the make language is its limited support for
    if conditionals. (Conditional statements are especially important
    in cross-platform makefiles.) Recent versions of make have helped
    matters by introducing an else if syntax. However, there are still
    only four basic variants of if: ifeq, ifneq, ifdef, and ifndef. If
    your conditional is more complex, requiring and, or, and not
    clauses, very cumbersome code is required.

    Suppose we want to detect the Linux/x86 target platform. The
    following hack is a common way of faking out the existence of an
    and conditional:

    ifeq ($(TARGET_OS)-$(TARGET_CPU),linux-x86)
    foo = bar
    endif

    or is not as easy. Suppose we want to detect x86 or x86_64, and
    suppose foo = bar is really a placeholder for 10 or more lines of
    code that we dont want to replicate. We are left with unpleasant
    options such as:

    # Terse but somewhat confusing
    ifneq (,$(filter x86 x86_64,$(TARGET_CPU))
    foo = bar
    endif

    # Verbose but easier to understand
    ifeq ($(TARGET_CPU),x86)
    TARGET_CPU_IS_X86 := 1
    else ifeq ($(TARGET_CPU),x86_64)
    TARGET_CPU_IS_X86 := 1
    else
    TARGET_CPU_IS_X86 := 0
    endif
    ifeq ($(TARGET_CPU_IS_X86),1)
    foo = bar
    endif

    A lot of makefile code could be simplified if the language supported
    a full-fledged expression syntax.

Two Types of Variables

    There are two types of variable assignments in make. := evaluates
    its right-hand side immediately; = evaluates it later when the
    variable is referenced. The former is how most other programming
    languages work and tends to be more efficient, particularly if the
    expression is expensive to evaluate. The latter, however, is more
    common in most makefiles.

    There are some valid reasons for using = (deferred evaluation), but
    often it can be eliminated with careful makefile design. Aside from
    the performance problem, deferred evaluation makes it more difficult
    to read and understand makefile code.

    Normally, you can read a program from top to bottomthe same order
    that the statements are executedand know exactly what the state of
    the program is at each point in time. With deferred evaluation, you
    cannot know the value of a variable without knowing what happens
    later in the program, too. A variables value can change without
    your directly modifying it. If you try to debug a makefile using
    debug prints such as:

    $(warning VAR=$(VAR))

    ...you may not get the information you want.

Pattern Rules and Search Paths

    Some rules use % characters to represent an arbitrary filenamethe
    rule transformation one class of file to another. For example, a
    %.o: %.c rule compiles a .c source file into an .o object file.

    Suppose we need to build an object file foo.o, but foo.c lives
    somewhere other than the current directory. makes vpath feature
    tells it where to look for these files. Unfortunately, if there are
    two files named foo.c in the vpath directories for %.c, it may
    select the wrong one.

    The following standard makefile coding pattern falls apart if two
    source files have the same nameeven if one of them is unused and
    just happens to live in the same directory as another one that you
    do use. The problem is that the mapping from source path to object
    path loses information, but makes design requires it to attempt to
    reverse this mapping.

    O_FILES := $(patsubst %.c,%.o,$(notdir $(C_FILES)))
    vpath %.c $(sort $(dir $(C_FILES)))
    $(LIB): $(O_FILES)

Other Missing Language Features

    make has no data types other than strings. There is no Boolean type,
    list type, or hash/dictionary type.

    There is no scoping. All variables are global.

    Support for looping is limited. $(foreach) will evaluate an
    expression several times and concatenate the results, but the
    resulting string is still just a variable expansion. For example,
    you cant use $(foreach) to create a family of related rules.

    User-defined functions exist but have the same limitations as
    $(foreach). They are just variable expansions and cannot use the
    full language syntax or create rules.

Reliability

    makes reliability is poor, especially for larger or incremental
    builds.  Sometimes a build fails with a strange error and you need
    to resort to voodoo magic like typing make clean, hoping this will
    fix things.  Sometimes (more dangerous) it appears to succeed, but
    something wasnt rebuilt and youll get mysterious crashes, etc. at
    runtime.

Missing Dependencies

    You must tell make all of the dependencies of each target. If you
    dont tell it about a dependency, it wont rebuild the target when
    that dependency changes.

    For C/C++, many compilers can output dependency information in a format
    that make understands. For other tools, though, dependencies are
    invariably incomplete. Consider a Python script that imports other
    Python modules. A change to the script may change the scripts output;
    this is easy to remember and code into the makefile. But a change to one
    of those modules may also change the scripts output. Its challenging
    to list all these dependencies and keep them up to date.

Last-Modified Timestamps

    make determines whether a target is out of date by comparing its
    last-modified timestamp against those of its dependencies. It does
    not examine the contents of the files, only their timestamps.

    File system timestamps are not especially reliable, particularly in
    a networked environment. Systems clocks drift out of sync.
    Sometimes clocks go backwards in time. Sometimes programs explicitly
    set a files timestamp, wiping out the real last-modified time.

    When these things happen, make doesnt rebuild things that needed to
    be rebuilt, resulting in an incomplete build.

Command Line Dependencies

    When a programs command line arguments change, its output might
    also change. (An example: changing the -D options passed to the C
    preprocessor.) make doesnt rebuild in this case, resulting in
    incorrect incremental builds.

    You can work around this by having each rule depend on Makefile.
    This is error-prone, because you might forget to do this on a
    particular rule.  Also, Makefile might include other makefiles,
    which in turn might include other makefiles; you must list all of
    them and keep the list up to date. Further, many makefile changes
    are innocuous. You probably dont want to rebuild every target in a
    makefile just because you changed a comment.

Environment Variable Inheritance and Dependencies

    Not only does every environment variable turn into a make variable,
    but also these environment variables are passed on to the programs
    make runs. Since every user has different environment variables set,
    two users running the same build may unexpectedly get different
    behavior.

    Changing an environment variable exported to a child process might
    affect its output, so this ought to trigger a rebuild if you want to
    be completely safe. make does not rebuild when this happens.

Multiple Concurrent Sessions

    If you run two instances of make in the same directory tree at the
    same time, they will collide with one another when they try to build
    the same files. Most likely, one or both will die with an error.

Editing Files During a Build

    If you edit and save a file in the middle of a make session, the
    results are unpredictable. It may correctly pick up the changes; it
    may not, and youll have to type make again; or, if you are unlucky,
    depending on timing, you may end up with a tree where some targets
    are stale but cannot be fixed with another make.

Cleaning Up Old Files

    Suppose your project used to have a source file foo.c, but that file
    was deleted and removed from the makefile. The object file foo.o
    built from foo.c will stay around. This is usually acceptable, but
    these old files may accumulate over time, and sometimes this can
    cause problems. For example, they may be erroneously picked up as
    part of a vpath search.

    Another example: suppose that a file that was previously generated
    by the build is checked into revision control, and the rule that
    generated it is removed from the makefile. Revision control systems
    will usually not overwrite the old autogenerated file, out of fear
    that they might destroy something important. If you dont notice
    this error message, delete the file manually, and re-update your
    tree, you will be using a stale version of the file.

Path Canonicalization

    Files have more than one path. Even ignoring both hard and symbolic
    links, foo.c, ./foo.c, ../bar/foo.c, and /home/user/bar/foo.c might
    all be the same file. make should treat them the same for purposes
    of walking the dependency tree, but it doesnt.

    This problem is worse under Windows, where the file system is not
    case sensitive.

After a Failed or Cancelled Build

    Once one build has failed, further incremental builds may be unsafe.
    In particular, after a command fails, make does not delete the
    partially built output file! If you type make again, it might
    conclude that the file is already up to date and try to use it. make
    has an option to delete these files, but it isnt the default.

    Hitting Ctrl-C during a build can also leave your tree in a suspect
    state.

    Any time you run into a problem with an incremental build, your tree
    is suspectif one file wasnt rebuilt properly, who knows how many
    others werent? If this happens, you should probably start again
    from a clean tree.

    A misbehaving process can also do a lot of harm to your tree. If a
    build step malfunctions and starts overwriting or deleting random
    files in your tree, make clean wont be good enough. You will
    probably have to set up a brand new tree from scratch. (Hopefully
    the runaway process didnt destroy your changes.)

Performance

    makes performance scales poorly (nonlinearly) with project size.

Incremental Build Performance

    One would hope that rebuilding a project would take time
    proportional to the number of targets that need to be rebuilt.
    Unfortunately, this is not the case.

    Since makes incremental build reliability is suspect, users must do
    clean builds on a regular basis, either as necessary (whenever you
    hit a build error, try a clean build) or even all the time (out of
    paranoia).  Better to be safe and wait for a clean build than to
    take the risk that a build appears to pass but is out of sync with
    the source code.

    A files last-modified timestamp can change without its contents
    changing. This leads to unnecessary rebuilds.

    A buggy makefile may list too many dependencies, so a target may be
    rebuilt even though none of its (real) dependencies have changed.
    Careless use of phony rules is another common problem (phony rules
    must always be rerun).

    Even if your makefiles are bug-free and your incremental builds are
    perfectly reliable, performance is less than ideal. Suppose you edit
    a single .c file (not a header file) in a large project. If you type
    make from the top of the project, make must reparse all the
    makefiles, recursively invoking itself many times, and walk the
    dependency tree of all targets to see whether any of them need to be
    rebuilt. The time spent running the compiler may only be a small
    fraction of the total time.

Recursive Make and Performance

    Sloppy use of recursive make is particularly dangerous. Suppose that
    your project consists of two executables A and B, which both depend
    on a library C. The top makefile needs to recurse into directories A
    and B, obviously. Wed also like to be able to type make from A or B
    if we only want to build A or only B, so we might have those
    makefiles recurse into sibling directory ../C. Now suppose we type
    make from the top of the tree; well recurse into C twice!

    This is mostly innocuous in this example, but in large projects, a
    single directory might be visited dozens of times. Each time, it has
    to be reparsed and its targets dependency trees must be walked.
    make has no built-in safeguards against this.

Parallel Make

    makes parallel make promises large speedups, especially with the
    increasing popularity of multi-core CPUs. Unfortunately, the
    delivery falls short of the promise.

    Parallel makes output is difficult to read. Its hard to see which
    warnings, etc. are associated with which commands when several
    processes are running concurrently in the same shell.

    Parallel make is exceptionally sensitive to correct dependency
    specification. If two rules are not connected through dependencies,
    make assumes that those rules can run in any order, or for that
    matter in parallel. When running a makefile serially, make tends to
    behave predictably: if A depends on B and C, then first B will be
    built, then C, then A. Of course make is free to build C before B,
    but with serial make, the order is deterministic.

    With parallel make, B and C may (but are not guaranteed to) build in
    parallel. If C depends on B having run first, but this dependency
    was not spelled out in the makefile, Cs build will probably fail
    (but may not, depending on timing). Parallel make tends to flush out
    these missing dependencies from makefiles. Thats not a bad thing,
    since missing dependencies cause other problems and its good to
    find and fix them, but the practical effect is that using parallel
    make on a large project is frustrating.

    Parallel makes interactions with recursive make are problematic.
    Each session of make is independent, so each one attempts to
    parallelize the build independently of the others and has an
    incomplete view of the overall dependency graph. We face a tradeoff
    between reliability and performance. On one hand we would like to
    parallelize builds not just within a single makefile, but across all
    of the makefiles. But since make doesnt know about inter-makefile
    dependencies, fully parallelizing submakes does not work.

    Certain submakes can be run in parallel, while others must be run
    serially. Specifying these dependencies is clumsy, and its easy to
    forget some of them. Its tempting to fall back to the safe option
    of walking the makefile tree serially and parallelizing only within
    a single makefile at a time, but this greatly reduces parallelism,
    particularly in incremental builds.

Automatic Dependency Generation with Microsoft Visual C++

    Many compilers, like gcc, can output dependency information in a
    format that make understands. Unfortunately, Microsoft Visual C++
    cannot. It has a command line option /showIncludes, however, that
    can print this information, and another script can postprocess it
    into a form that make understands. This requires running an extra
    script for every C file.  Launching (for example) the Python
    interpreter for each C file is not cheap.

Builtin Rules

    make has numerous builtin rules. These slightly simplify coding
    small makefiles, but medium to large projects usually override them.
    They hurt performance because make walks these extra pattern rules
    trying to find ways to build files. Many of these rules are
    obsoletefor example, two of them are intended for use with the RCS
    and SCCS revision control systems, which very few people still
    useand yet they slow down everyones builds.

    You can disable them on the command line with make -r, but this is
    not the default. There is a line you can add to your makefile to
    remove them, but this is also not the default and many people forget
    to add it.

Miscellaneous

    There are a few other issues with make that dont fit cleanly into
    the categories above.

Silence is Golden

    According to Eric Raymond, One of Unixs oldest and most persistent
    design rules is that when a program has nothing interesting or
    surprising to say, it should shut up. Well-behaved Unix programs do
    their jobs unobtrusively, with a minimum of fuss and bother. Silence
    is golden. make does not follow this rule.

    When you type make, by default, the log includes every programs
    full command line and everything it prints to stdout and stderr.
    This is too much information. Important warning/error messages are
    buried in the output, and the text can scroll by so quickly as to
    make it unreadable.

    You can suppress a lot of this output with make -s, but this is not
    the default. Also, there is no intermediate mode where make tells
    you what file it is currently building, without printing out the
    command lines.

Multi-Target Rules

    Some tools produce more than one output file, but make rules can
    only have one target. If you try to write a dependency on an
    additional output file that wasnt listed as the target of the rule,
    make will not recognize the connection between the two rules.

Warnings That Should Be Errors

    make prints a warning but does not abort with an error if it detects
    a circular dependency. This likely indicates a serious makefile bug,
    but make treats it as a minor problem.

    Likewise, make prints a warning but does not abort with an error if
    there are two rules describing how to build one target. It simply
    ignores one of them. Again, this is a serious makefile bug, but make
    does not treat it as such.

Creating Output Directories

    It is useful to put output files for separate build configurations
    in separate output directories, so that you dont have to rebuild
    from scratch when you switch build configurations. For example, you
    might put debug binaries in a debug directory and release binaries
    in a release directory. Before you can create files in these
    directories, you must first create the directories.

    It would be nice if make did this automaticallyclearly you cant
    build a file when the directory its supposed to live in doesnt
    exist yetbut it doesnt.

    Its not very practical to put a mkdir -p $(dir $@)) command at the
    start of every rule. It would be inefficient, too, because youd be
    running mkdir many times on the same directory. Youd also have to
    ignore the errors if the directory already exists.

    You might try to solve this problem as follows:

    debug/%.o: %.c debug
            $(CC) -c $< -o $@

    debug:
            mkdir $@

    This looks like it ought to workif debug doesnt exist, create it
    before trying to build debug/foo.obut it doesnt. Creating a new
    directory entry increases the directorys last modified time.
    Suppose we are building both debug/foo.o and debug/bar.o. Creating
    debug/bar.o will increase debugs last-modified time. Now debugs
    last-modified time will be newer than debug/foo.os, so the next
    time we type make, debug/foo.o will unnecessarily be rebuilt. If
    rebuilding it actually deletes it and then creates a new file,
    rather than truncating the existing file, you get a never-ending
    cycle of rebuilds.

    The solution is to depend on a file rather than a directory
    (debug/dummy.txt rather than debug). This requires an extra
    unnecessary build step (touch debug/dummy.txt), and it can interact
    poorly with makes automatic deletion of intermediate files
    generated during a build. If youre not careful to make every target
    depend on its dummy.txt file, you may also have problems with
    parallel make.

Conclusion

    make is a popular but flawed tool. You could do worse than to use
    make, but you could also do better. If you are working on a large
    software project, you should consider using an alternative tool. If
    you must use make, you should be aware of its defects.

